# Interpreter Design

## Introduction

This document outlines the key design decisions in the interpreter and its companion components:
bytecode instruction set, executable file format, etc. This document is organized as follows:

| Title                           | Description                                                |
| ------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| Requirements                    | Enlists the requirements to the component.                 |
| Key Design Decisions            | Summarizes the key decisions to address the requirements.  |
| Rationale                       | Elaborates on the rationales behind the decisions.         |
| Specification / Implementation  | Provides relevant links.                                   |

Please refer to the [glossary](glossary.md) for terminology clarification.

### Common Requirements

This section outlines common requirements that should be considered while designing the interpreter
and all related components of the platform:

1. The platform should scale from microcontrollers to high-end mobile phones:
    1. It should fit into 50KB of ROM.
    1. It should be able to run consuming 64KB of RAM.
1. Program execution via bytecode interpretation should be enabled on all targets.
1. The platform should support multiple programming languages:
    1. Java (and probably other languages that compile to JVM bytecode) should run with acceptable
       performance.
    1. JavaScript (and probably other dynamically typed languages) should run on the platform, but
       their performance may be worse than shown by specialized engines.

## Bytecode

### Requirements

1. Bytecode should allow the interpreter to run no slower than state of the art interpreters.
1. Bytecode should be compact in size to avoid bloating application code.
1. Bytecode description should have a single entry point to simplify maintenance
   across all components of the platform.

### Key Design Decisions

1. Bytecode is register-based: all arguments and variables are mapped to virtual registers,
   and most of bytecodes encode virtual registers as operands.
1. There is a dedicated register called accumulator, which is addressed implicitly by some
   bytecodes and shared across all function frames during runtime.
1. Bytecode's instruction set architecture is machine-readable with a dedicated API for
   code and documentation generation.

### Rationale

For the rationale on the bytecode type, please see [here](rationale-for-bytecode.md).

Rationale on the machine-readable instruction set architecture is following. Since bytecode
is the main form of program representation, information about it is needed in many components of
the platform outside the interpreter. Having this crucial information copy-pasted or delivered as
a bunch of C/C++ headers is very fragile and error-prone. At the same time,
with the machine-readable ISA we now already can re-use this information in many places, e.g.:

* In Panda Assembler's back-end, we automatically generate emission of bytecode in the binary form.
* Converter from bytecode to the compiler's intermediate representation is partially implemented
  with code autogenerated from the ISA.

Besides, the machine-readable form naturally sets up the framework for self-testing (e.g.
definitions have been defined and used, different parts of instruction description don't contradict
themselves, etc.).

### Specification / Implementation

Please find the implementation of the instruction set architecture [here](../isa/isa.yaml).

## Executable File Format

### Requirements

1. All entities in the executable file should be encoded and stored compactly to avoid bloating
   application code.
1. Format should be enforced as "flat" layout as possible: referencing metadata from other metadata
   should be kept at minimum to reduce access overhead during runtime.
1. Runtime memory footprint of executable files should be low.

### Key Design Decisions

1. The entire code of the application (excluding frameworks and external libraries) fits into a
   single file to gain maximum benefits from deduplicating constant string pools, information
   about types, etc.
1. All metadata entities are split into two groups: local (declared in the current executable file)
   and foreign (declared elsewhere). Local entities can be accessed directly by the offset
   in the offset. Additionally, 4-byte alignment is enforced for the most of data structures for
   more efficient data reads from the Panda binary file. Foreign entities are loaded from their
   respective files on demand.
1. The format uses raw offsets as the main access method to the actual data and doesn't
   require explicitly how structures should be located relative to each other.

### Specification / Implementation

Please find the specification [here](file_format.md).

## Interpreter

### Requirements

1. Interpreter should run no slower than state of the art interpreters.
1. Interpreter should be portable enough to run on targets from IoT devices
   to high-end mobile phones.
1. Interpreter should not create extra pressure on the host system.

### Key Design Decisions

1. Interpreter uses indirect threaded dispatch technique
   (implemented via computed goto) to reduce dispatch overhead.
1. Interpreter does not depend on C++ standard library. All necessary classes, containers, etc.
   are reimplemented by the platform.
1. Interpreter is stackless (from the host stack perspective): Whenever a call from managed code
   to managed code is performed, no new host frame is created for the interpreter itself.

### Rationale

1. Interpreters are by nature slower than native code execution. Slowdown can be explained by:
    1. The inevitable extra cost that interpreters pay for decoding and dispatching bytecode
       instructions.
    1. The "heaviness" of language semantics that interpreters should implement.
    1. The "nativeness" of the language implementation to the platform. A language that is
       implemented in another language that runs on the platform may run slower because of
       additional runtime overhead.
1. An ideal target would be 5x-10x slowdown factor (compared to native execution)
   for statically typed languages that run on the platform natively, and 15x-20x for L2 languages.
1. Panda should scale onto a wide range of devices, including IoT devices. Although more and
   more toolchains support C++ compilation for IoT, the standard library is often not present
   on the device. Since static linking with a subset of the library is a pain and may not guarantee
   optimal size of resulting native binary executable files, it is more reasonable to reimplement
   required parts.
1. According to our experiments, a stackless interpreter for a stack-based bytecode (which is by
   nature slower) can even beat sometimes a non-stackless interpreter for a register-based
   bytecode (which is by nature faster).

### Specification / Implementation

Please find the reference implementation [here](../runtime/interpreter).

## Virtual Stack

### Requirements

1. All virtual registers should explicitly and precisely distinguish between garbage collectable
   objects and non-garbage collectable primitives to simplify automatic memory management.
1. Virtual registers should be able to hold following types: unsigned and signed integers with
   the size of up to 64 bits, floating point numbers of single and double precision, raw pointers
   to the objects on 32-bit and 64-bit architectures.
1. Virtual stack should abstract limitations possibly imposed by the host stack.

### Key Design Decisions

1. All virtual registers are "tagged", meaning that they contain both the payload and additional
   metadata (a "tag"), which allows at least distinguishment between garbage collectable and other
   types.
1. The size of a virtual register is not hardcoded by design. Currently it is always 128 bits,
   but this is an implementation detail which is hidden behind the interfaces
   and can be reduced for memory-constrained targets and to 64 bits (using NaN-tagging technique).
1. By default, virtual stack is not mapped to a host stack. Instead, it is allocated on heap using
   platform's memory management facilities. It is important that this behavior is not
   hardcoded by design, so that it can be reconfigured for platforms where performance may benefit from
   mapping virtual stack directly to the host stack.

### Rationale

1. Although tagged virtual registers occupy more memory (especially on 64-bit architectures),
   redundant memory consumption is cheaper than ongoing runtime penalties on garbage collector
   trying to distinguish between objects from non-objects on an "imprecise" stack.
1. Where does 128 come from? It is `128 = 64 + 64`. The first 64 is either `sizeof(long int)`
   or `sizeof(double)` or `sizeof(void *)` on a 64-bit architecture (i.e. theoretical maximum
   size of the payload we are required to store in a virtual register). The second 64 is for tag
   and padding. A lot of free space is expected to be in the padding area. Probably we may use it
   for memory management or some other needs.
1. Enforcing mapping of a virtual stack to the host stack brings some unpleasant constraints
   on IoT devices. On such devices the size of the host stack may be severely limited: as a result,
   managed applications have to think about this limitation, which contradicts the idea of
   portability of managed applications. We can relax this constraint to some extent with configurable
   virtual stack implementation, and can even to a greater extent with the stackless interpreter (see above).

### Specification / Implementation

Please find the reference implementation [here](../runtime/interpreter/frame.h).

## Quality Assurance

### Requirements

1. Interpreter should allow testing without involving front-ends of concrete languages.
1. Interpreter should allow early testing.
1. Interpreter should allow early benchmarking.

### Key Design Decisions

1. A light-weight Panda Assembly language is developed, along with the Panda Assembler tool.
1. A compliance test suite for the Panda Assembly language is created. The core part of the suite
   are small chunks of hand-written Panda Assembly covering corner cases, while the majority of
   cases are covered by automatically generated chunks.
1. A set of benchmarks is ported to Panda Assembly and maintained as a part of the source tree.

### Specification / Implementation

Please find the specification [here](assembly_format.md).

Please find the implementation [here](../assembler).
